Violence on the streets, threats from
abroad. The Islamic Republic of Iran is
being squeezed. The Iranian regime is
running out of options, and the people
are running out of patience. The Islamic
Republic is out of tools other than
force. Regimes that rely entirely on
force, they can last for quite some
time, but it really does change the
nature of their relationship with the
population [music] that they govern. The
more people you kill, the more
resentment there is.
>> Some
>> [music]
>> estimates put that death toll possibly
in the tens of thousands. [music]
The other thing that makes these
protests different is that they had
initially an economic trigger. But it
turned into something much broader.
[music] There's a real sense of
hopelessness in Iran right now. This
time, people had [music] simply had
enough, and they wanted the regime gone.
It's facing [music]
a US president unlike any US president
that it's had to face in its 47-year
history. President Trump has warned Iran
to make a nuclear deal with the US or
face military strikes. They should want
to make a deal. They know the
consequences if they don't.
>> Iran says it has agreed with the US to
continue talks to de-escalate and avoid
a military confrontation. Talks are
ongoing, but [music] there's little
doubt that the government has been
weakened. These protests will keep
coming up, and the regime will keep
having to put them down by force, and at
some point you may see [music] an end to
the republic as we know it. So, how did
Iran get here? And what comes next for
its leaders and the millions of Iranians
hoping for change?
The Iranian system is a theocracy. At
the head of the theocracy, you have the
supreme leader. He isn't the only
decision maker, but he's the final
decision maker. You actually have quite
a lot of debate within the Islamic
Republic between the different political
factions. So, the whole system is very
fluid. I think the government right now
faces a perfect storm. They have a great
many problems from the political to the
serious [music] economic issues that
they face.
The economy has been in a bad way for a
long [music] time. There've been
sanctions and policies that have caused
inflation for many years. For more than
four decades, Iran's standoff with the
West has meant heavy sanctions [music]
on almost every aspect of its economy.
Double-digit inflation in Iran [music]
is not unusual. It's been a kind of
chronic hallmark of the economy [music]
for some time.
The depreciation of Iran's currency, the
rial, is compounding inflationary
pressures. The ongoing disparity [music]
came to a head in December 2025, when
one US dollar became [music] worth
almost 1.5 million rials.
That's devastated the spending power of
ordinary Iranians.
The rial has declined in value more than
98% [music]
since 2018. It's very, very expensive to
buy anything that includes imports.
People who considered [music] themselves
middle class, they now find themselves
poor. And the regime has proved
consistently unable to reverse this.
[music]
Falling oil revenue is worsening the
situation. Brent crude, the global
benchmark, fell to around $60 a barrel
in 2025. [music]
Prices are up this year,
but they're still almost $100 below what
the International [music]
Monetary Fund says Iran's government
would need to break even.
All of these oil-producing countries
look closely at the extent to which oil
is able to cover their budget
allocations. There is already a problem
with cheap oil in the market. That often
drives concerns about budget deficits.
And Iran has that problem with or
without sanctions because under
sanctions it can still sell oil and it
has been selling oil. Sanctions were
reimposed in 2018 during Trump's first
term and contributed to a sharp drop in
exports. When Joe Biden became
president, however, enforcement eased
and flows boomed again with much of it
moving to China via a fleet of shadow
tankers. But this hasn't necessarily
meant more cash for the Iranian economy.
Because sanctions have such [music] a
chilling effect, by discounting oil
significantly, it can kind of
incentivize or encourage buyers.
>> [music]
>> While the Iranian government blames much
of this on Western sanctions, analysts
contend [music] corruption and
mismanagement have played a role as
well. The existence of sanctions [music]
has meant that some major economic
players inside Iran, including the IRGC,
have benefited from them.
The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, a
branch of the armed forces, has filled
the gap left by failed companies or
foreign ones that have exited the
country.
Sanctions create the opportunity [music]
through smuggling, through scarcity, and
they create the the opportunity for
corruption. Figures linked to the
supreme leader
>> [music]
>> and the IRGC have amassed an investment
empire far beyond the borders of the
Islamic Republic.
>> [music]
>> The IRGC receives kickbacks on a lot of
deals that are going on. Often, if
[music] you're trying to do business
with a with an entity in Iran, you're
inevitably going to come up against
someone from the IRGC, either current or
>> [music]
>> former. They really have their tentacles
spread throughout the Iranian system.
The corruption and neglect [music] are
seen as having left Iran facing a
growing environmental emergency. In
Tehran, at the start of the autumn,
There were reports [music] of some taps
running dry, that the amount of water in
in dams and reservoirs was dropping to
record [music] lows. The government
hasn't really been able to manage this.
It's too big for them.
This was an extraordinary thing for
someone to say. [music] So, the
ecological problems that Iran faces
right now are acute, [music] they are
severe, and they've already started to
impact industry [music] and the economy.
On top of this, there is international
pressure.
Moments ago, Israel launched Operation
Rising Lion.
Israel, having long feared a
nuclear-armed Iran, [music]
struck several facilities believed to be
enriching uranium. Israel targeted the
nuclear program, but it also targeted
civilian population centers, [music]
including Tehran.
So, it affected a big chunk of the
Iranian population.
Up until recently, the nuclear program
did have broad support. But, as
successive waves of sanctions [music]
were implemented on Iran, there is a
public backlash. The new Shah, Mohammad
Reza Pahlavi, Iran's nuclear program
dates back to the 1950s,
>> [music]
>> and the government has long maintained
its purpose was peaceful.
But, that sentiment is often questioned.
>> [music]
>> The US joined Israel in striking Iran's
nuclear program, and that has really
been humiliating for the Iranians.
>> [music]
>> Iran, the bully of the Middle East, must
now make peace.
>> Iran's geopolitical position [music] has
been enormously weakened. Iran
was the one country to welcome the Hamas
attacks of October the 7th, [music]
2023, and it thought that it would
weaken Israel, would strengthen the
position of Iran. While there's no
evidence to suggest that Tehran helped
plan the attack,
the regime framed [music] it as a gain
for its allies.
The opposite seems to have happened.
The axis of resistance, a coalition of
states and militant groups intent on
countering Israeli and US influence in
the region, is now [music] shattered.
In Gaza, Hamas has been reduced as a
serious threat. Hezbollah in Lebanon has
been decapitated.
>> [music]
>> And in Syria, President Assad was
toppled by a Sunni power, which is very
much opposed to Iran. [music]
Although the loss of allies [music] has
further isolated Iran, other Gulf
nations don't necessarily welcome the
collapse [music] of its government. Iran
is a competitor for most of the Gulf
Arab states,
>> [music]
>> not an economic competitor, but
politically, ideologically, for [music]
influence, they're worried about the
kind of significant instability and
power [music] vacuum that the collapse
of the Islamic Republic would leave and
what impact it would have on them.
>> [music]
>> It's this crisis of legitimacy that lays
at the heart of Iran's turmoil. The
Islamic Republic has been struggling
with its
>> [music]
>> legitimacy for a long time. This is a
young population. Most of the people who
live in Iran today were not alive at the
time of the revolution. They don't share
[music] the experiences of the supreme
leader, Ali Khamenei, and his generals,
his clerics. It is a very divided
society. There have always been these
tensions between [music]
some of the social, cultural laws that
the constitution has tried to impose
[music]
on people. Khamenei has been very
careful to eliminate any kind of
opposition that would be credible. He
either, you know, puts them in jail,
[music] puts them on house arrest, or
they disappear.
But there has been one figure to emerge
>> [music]
>> whose roots lie in the revolution
itself. Reza Pahlavi is the former Crown
Prince of Iran. He's the son of Mohammad
Reza Pahlavi, the last Shah of Iran, who
was deposed in the 1979 Islamic
Revolution. He's been living in [music]
exile since 1978. He's a figure that has
become very popular outside,
particularly [music] amongst the Iranian
diaspora, but inside the country, it's
really unclear how popular he is. The
idea of a monarchy is still very
controversial in Iran. Not all Iranians
want that to happen. Even with no
obvious successor [music] to the current
government, Trump is using a shifting
set of justifications for military
action that could shatter the status
quo. Donald Trump has made threats, and
he has, you know, warned, for example,
>> [music]
>> that if the killing continued, then he
would intervene militarily. And I said,
"If you hang those people,
you're going to be hit harder than
you've ever been hit." There are things
that the US [music] might want to
achieve in another strike on Iran, and
protests could re-erupt any moment. The
system in Iran for the past 50 [music]
years has completely dictated the
landscape of geopolitics, not just in
the Middle East, but much more broadly.
>> [music]
>> You know, this is a country with
thousands of years of history. It is the
heart of Shia Islam. There are many
people in Iran who believe fervently
>> [music]
>> in the Islamic Republic, but they are
now a minority. This massive country
[music] in the middle of the region with
huge amounts of oil
and a highly educated population with a
industrialized developed economy is a
major major challenge, [music]
not just to the US, but to the West. I
think it's of huge consequence what
happens to Iran for all of us.
>> [music]